---
layout: post
title: "Simplify your Code by using  Ruby's blocks."
description: "How ruby blocks can be used to simplify method that require custom configurations."
date: 2017-01-18
read: "5 min read"
category: software
permalink: /blog/blocks/
---

This week my writing topic is on `Ruby’ blocks` and how as a developer we can use them to simplify our  code. This is part of my on-going research project where I examine the code of an open source project and  discuss something of interest.

My current focus is on the Faraday Gem - a popular project that provides a simple configurable interface for HTTP requests. The project heavily uses blocks , which is something that I rarely use in my own code. With that as a motivation, I  have outline how  Faraday uses configuration blocks and how that  benefits the project.

## Overview of a block
There are a number of really good blog post that do a great job at discussing what blocks are. Take a look at  [ruby blocks in less than 5 minutes](https://mixandgo.com/blog/mastering-ruby-blocks-in-less-than-5-minutes "ruby blocks in less than 5 minutes")
for a good  overview. The key concepts for us is that the code blocks  executes when the  program reaches a `yield` statement. The other useful thing about blocks is that they capture their context at the time of creation. This means that only those local variables that are in scope when the block is created are  available when the block is executed.

The example below, the local variable **a** exists both:
 - within the function `some_function` and
-  outside the function. 

When the code runs, and the variable is printed you would expect "this lives within the some_function", but instead you get "this exists when the block is created”. That is because variable **a** exists in different scopes, and the scope the block uses is assigned when it is first created rather than when it is executed.

~~~ ruby
def some_function
  a = "this lives within the some_function"
  yield if block_given?
end

a = "this exists when the block is created"

some_function do
  puts a
end
~~~

The code outputs this exists when the block is created. 

## How Faraday Gem uses blocks
The below code is a typical example of how Faraday uses blocks to configure the methods behaviour. The method `run_request` calls a block on another method called `build_request`This configures the `req` object using closure to pass in any parameters such as url, headers or body. 

What is really interesting here is  having another yield within a block. This allows the method `run_request` to receive a block that is then pass to `build_request` method to configure its req field. 

~~~ ruby
def run_request(method, url, body, headers)
# code has been removed 
 request = build_request(method) do |req|
req.url(url)                if url
req.headers.update(headers) if headers
req.body = body             if body
yield(req) if block_given?
  end
# code has been removed
end
~~~

## Using blocks  to simplify the code.
A method will often require slightly different behaviour for one of its invocation. Maybe it needs to print out a log message or send an email but that is restricted to a single method call. 

The developer is faced with a quandary in what to do.

They could either:
- Create a new method  with the modified behaviour. 
- Modify the  existing method with a switch to execute the new behaviour. The behaviour is *switched* on using a parameter that is invoked with the method. `
- Allow a block to configure a method to modify how the method is executed.

While the first option gets the job done it can result in a number of methods that essentially do the same thing. It also means that the code is often repeated which adds to the programme overhead, and any future modifications are  required in multiple places.

The second option using parameters to distinguish between the options can become long and unwieldy. In this situation it is very difficult not to end up in a mess of switch statements. This can make future modification difficult as each logic path has to be checked to ensure that it hasn’t unwittingly being changed.

The alternative is to just change the behaviour of that one method being invoked using a configuration block.  This could work as follows, by having a method yield itself.

~~~ ruby
class SomeFancyObject
   def some_method
	 # does its thing
	yield(self) if block_given?
   end
end
~~~

This allows any invocations  to be  customised by allowing  blocks to be passed to the method. The `yield` includes itself as a parameter that gives the block access to the instance methods. 

This can remove the need to modify the existing method - see the example below. When the method is executed, the  block configures that the  instance method `does_another_thing` also runs

~~~ ruby
some_fancy_object = SomeFancyObject.new

some_fancy_object.some_method do |a|
 a.does_another_thing
end
~~~

The Gem library Rack uses a `instance_eval` to change the self to that of the instance. This removes the need to include the parameter self in the block which does have a  cleaner look, though you now have the  downside risk of confusing future maintainers  with a block that no longer works as  expected.

## Example using instance_eval
~~~ ruby
class SomeFancyObject
   def does_another_thing 
	puts ‘does_another_thing’
end

   def some_method(&block)
	 # does its thing
	instance_eval(&block) if block_given?
   end
end

some_fancy_object = SomeFancyObject.new

some_fancy_object.some_method do |a|
	does_another_thing
end
~~~

Using  blocks  to configure a method can be a great way to extend behaviour and one that I will be using more often in the future.


## Appendix
- [mastering ruby blocks in less than 5 minutes](https://mixandgo.com/blog/mastering-ruby-blocks-in-less-than-5-minutes)
- [ruby\ blocks](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_blocks.htm)
